Quantitatively, production means quantity produced.
In general, production is concerned with the activity of producing goods and services.
## Productivity
It measures how effectively resources such as labor, materials, and capital are used to produce goods and services, directly impacting an organization's efficiency, cost savings, and profitability. In industrial engineering, improving productivity means optimizing processes to reduce waste, lower operational costs, enhance quality, and increase output without necessarily increasing inputs. This leads to more competitive businesses, better use of technology, improved living standards, and sustainable growth. Productivity also helps organizations adapt to market demands and technological changes, ensuring long-term success and resilience in dynamic environments.<br>
$
Productivity = \frac{Output}{Input}
$
<br>
*==Production can be increased by increasing the inputs, but this may not increase the productivity.<br>
Efficiency is not the same as productivity. Efficiency is the ratio of actual output attained to standard output expected==*
## Productivity Measure
1. #### Partial Productivity Measure
Partial Productivity is the ratio of output to one class of input.
$$
Labour\ Productivity = \frac{Output}{Labour\ Input}
$$

2. #### Total Factor Productivity Measure
Total-factor Productivity is the ratio of net output to sum of associated labour and captial (factor) inputs.
$$
Total\ Factor\ Productivity = \frac{Net\ Output}{Labour\ and\ Capital\ inputs}
$$
## Advantages & Limitations of Partial Productivity Measure

| **Advantages**                                                      | **Limitations**                                                                     |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Easy to understand                                                  | If used alone, can be very misleading and may lead to costly mistakes               |
| Easy to obtain the data                                             | Do not have the ability to explain overall cost increases                           |
| Easy to compute the productivity indices                            | Tend to shift the blame to the wrong areas of management control                    |
| Easy to sell to management                                          | Profit control through partial productivity measures can be a hit and miss approach |
| Some partial productivity indicator data is available industry wide |                                                                                     |
| Good diagnostic tool                                                |                                                                                     |
## Advantages & Limitations of Total - Factor Productivity Measure

| Advantages                                                  | Limitations                                                                                  |
| ----------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| The data from company records are relatively easy to obtain | Does not capture the impact of materials and energy inputs                                   |
| Usually appealing from a corporate economist’s viewpoint    | The value-added approach to defining the output is not very appropriate in a company setting |
|                                                             | Not appropriate when material costs form a sizable portion of total product costs            |
|                                                             | Data for comparison purposes are relatively difficult to obtain                              |
## Methods for Improving Productivity
1. #### Increased output for same input
	- Alterations in existing processes or systems
	- **Example -** Slight alteration in the location of billet making section of the steel plant by moving it closer to the furnace saves time, and prevents scale formation at the top of ladles.
	- Thus it improves productivity by saving time where there is more output but the same input.

2. #### Decreased input for same output
	- Introduction of a substitute raw material to manufacture a product that has the same properties and is available at lower prices reduces input costs.
	- Hence productivity ratio will increase due to decreased input by way of cheaper materials.
	- **Example -** Use of nylon gears instead of steel gears in automobiles, wherever possible.

3. #### Proportionate increase in O/P is more than proportionate increase in I/P
	- Consider the introduction of a new product into the existing product mix.
	- Assume that existing facilities are not fully utilized.
	- Now if the R&D department identifies a new product with a good market that can be produced using existing facilities, then
		- Increased revenue due to new product
		- Increased expenses due to material, operation, and maintenance
	- Note that there is a proportionate increase in input cost and also a net increase in productivity ratio.

4. #### Proportionate decrease in I/P is more than proportionate decrease in O/P
	- Dropping an uneconomical product from an existing product mix
		- Will decrease the revenue of the organization.
		- Will decrease maintenance, operation and material cost
	- This will result in a proportionate decrease in revenue and thus increase in the productivity ratio.

5. #### Increase in O/P with decrease in I/P
	- If advanced technical equipment like Robots are used,
		- There will be a drastic reduction in operation cost ==(though initial investment will be high)==
		- Advanced tech. will enable the production of more goods and hence more revenue.
	- Note that there is an increase in revenue but a decrease in input in the long run. Hence increased productivity ratio

## Types of Productivity Measures

1. #### Single Factor Productivity
$$
Productivity = \frac{Units\ Produced}{Labour\ Hours\ Used}
$$

2. #### Multi - Factor Productivity
$$
Productivity = \frac{Output}{Labor+Material+Energy+Capital+Miscellaneous}
$$

## Other Thoughts on Productivity

- “Productivity is an attitude of mind”
- “Productivity means doing something better today than yesterday”
- “Productivity means continuous improvement”
- For the survival of any organization the productivity ratio needs to be at least 1
- If productivity ratio >1 the organization is in a comfortable position


## Productivity Levels

1. #### National Productivity
$$
= \frac{GDP}{Employed\ Work\ Force}
$$

2. #### Industry Productivity
3. #### Company Productivity
4. #### Divisional Productivity
5. #### Branch Productivity
6. #### Individual Productivity


## Productivity Cycle
The productivity of an organization is not just a one-time affair but it is a continuous process. As it has been rightly said success is a marathon and not a sprint. It involves all the persons, equipment, machinery, material, and energy of an organization. It is not one person’s job.


## Factors Affecting Productivity

There is quite a variety of factors that can affect productivity, both positively and negatively.
- Capital investments in production
- Capital investments in technology
- Capital investments in equipment
- Capital investments in facilities
- Economies of scale
- Workforce knowledge and skill resulting from training and experience
- Technological changes
- Work methods
- Procedures
- Systems
- Quality of products
- Quality of processes
- Quality of management
- Legislative and regulatory environment
- General levels of education
- Social environment
- Geographic factors


## Reasons for Lower Productivity

- The wrong person in the job
- The right person in the wrong job.
- The right person in the right job is wrongly managed.
- Lack of focus, vision, priorities, or direction.
- Lack of ownership or participation by staff or team.
- Inadequate communication between staff or departments.
- Poor working environment.
- Inadequate training or coaching to do the job.
- Inadequate resources or tools for the job.
- Personal problems interfere with people's ability to work at their best.


## How Do We Improve Productivity?

- First point is to remember the MIG Cycle
- The profit goal is
$$
Profit = Revenue - Costs
$$
- Analyze the Revenues
- Analyze the Costs
- Find the vital few components of cost
- Closely look at
	- Labour costs
	- Material costs
	- Energy costs
	- Finance costs
	- Overhead costs
- Improving working conditions- lighting, ventilation, noise(music), temperature, work times
- Using appropriate and better tools
- Ergonomics and better work station layout
- Improving factory, stores & office layout
- Improving the method/process
- Improving the nutritional status of the worker
- Improving industrial house keeping and safety
- Improving welfare facilities and worker motivation
- Improving capital productivity
- Improving material productivity


## Essence of Productivity Improvement

1. #### Competitive Level of Productivity
	- No organization can continue to exist unless it maintains a competitive level of productivity.
	- Organizations which do not succeed in this are doomed to fail through stagnation followed by bankruptcy or closure.

2.  #### What is Productivity Improvement
	- Productivity improvement is not just doing things better.
	- More importantly, it is doing right things better.
	- It is a process of change.
	- To improve Productivity it is therefore necessary to manage change.

3.  #### Productivity as a Measure of Success
	- Productivity is the most important long term resource.
	- Not only for the success of the organizations & individuals but also for national economic & social development.
	- It is also a measure of the efficiency of the Managers.

4. #### Impact of Productivity 
	- Improving productivity can offset the impact of some of the problems of developing countries where rapid population growth, growing indebtedness, and inflation are very common.

5. #### The role of Productivity
	- The role of Productivity in increasing national welfare is now universally recognized.
	- In every country the main source of economic growth is an increase in Productivity & slackening of growth, stagnation & decline entail or are accompanied by a slowdown in Productivity improvement.
